the militant Palestinian group Hamas
smashes into Israel killing hundreds and
triggering War and the former Prim
Minister erod aled blames the government
should Netanyahu
resign yes you think he
will he will be forced to top of the
list of priorities how to rescue the
scores of hostages kidnapped by Hamas
and as Israel tries to reseal its
borders can Israelis ever again trust
their intelligence services and their
much wared
[Music]
Army welcome to conflict
Zone hi the late Israeli Statesman
Shimon Perez used to remind interviewers
that his people lived in a very rough
neighborhood it's just got a whole lot
rougher hasn't
it yeah unfortunately as we have all
witnessed in the last few days the
vicious attack of
Hamas has been one of the most brutal
that I think anyone can remember in the
modern history this was
uh uh an attack against civilians with a
an explicit purpose of killing as many
people as possible the most brutal and
vicious uh way and uh this is like uh
the same as Das except with greatest
success unfortunately in comparison do
you believe this was a oneoff Invasion a
one-off attack or could more be planned
and from outside Gaza next
time well I don't I don't look Hamas is
engaged in a
conflict violent conflict against Israel
for since its
inception for more than 25 years uh and
uh they don't want to make any peace
with Israel they don't want to recognize
Israel they don't have any actual any uh
territorial claims to Israel as May
other Palestinians have in the West Bank
they just want to destroy the state of
Israel and I think that it is quite
clear that they are inspired and
operated and by the
Iranians they are the long arm Iran has
a long um in the south of Israel which
is Hamas in the North of Israel which
isbah and their attacks are part of a
more comprehensive plan of Iran to upset
the entire balance in the Middle East
and to try and shake the foundations for
the state of Israel Iran has denied any
direct involvement and the Americans
themselves said they haven't seen so far
any evidence to suggest they were
involved you have you is this a gut feel
feeling on your part that they were
involved or the attack was in their
interest do you have any
evidence yeah we have some signs in
Israel I can't of course go into details
but we have some signs that it's
been inspired and coordinated by Iran
the head of the Revolutionary guards of
Iran was visiting leanon just a few days
before the attack and as you know the
head of the uh
operational uh activities of Hamas is
based in beuth so uh there is a good
reason to believe that they were
cooperating and coordinating and if that
were confirmed would Israel take action
direct action against
Iran I don't think that at the present
time uh we have any um plan
to attack Iran in a comprehensive manner
I mean with military with planes you
know air attack or missile attack
against Iran this is not the first
priority right now what we have to do is
to focus on the south part where it all
started now and in as long as Iran will
not take part
directly uh in a military action against
the state of Israel I doubt that we will
initiate any attack against them one
question seems to dominate at the moment
and that is what to do about the scores
of Israeli hostages which have been
kidnapped by the Palestinian islamist
group Hamas what what do you think the
government will do about the
hostages I must say I'm not certain that
I know and I'm not certain that even if
I knew that I'd like to share publicly
with anyone including you at this time
because I think it's very sensitive and
really involves the lives of people if
they were uh capable of butchering
raping mothers and then killing them and
killing the babies in their
homes they will not hesitate to do the
most brutal things
against the uh Israelis that are now
held by them in Gaza
so uh we certainly will do
things I doubt that there is any basis
for negotiations with them
because I don't think that they want
negotiations I think that they want to
release all the
Palestinian uh prisoners in the state of
Israel which are held in Israel and they
will try to use the Israelis held by
them as a as a trade uh for a trade uh
with this what will be the reaction how
we will handle it what will be the other
activities that we may plan uh what are
the
surprises that we are preparing I think
that this is not something that should
be
discussed if you were in power would you
do a deal with Hamas deals have been
done prisoner swaps have been done in
the past there was gillad Shalit in 2011
a thousand is a th000 Palestinian
prisoners were released to get him
home no my answer is no and this was my
answer when I was bye minister in a
much so to say better deal was offered
to me uh in exchange for gilad shal at
the time I was prime minister and I
turned it down I thought that we
shouldn't uh make it and that uh it's
not worthwhile and by the way one has to
remember I'm not sure that you are aware
of it but all the leadership of hamash
today all the leadership of hamash today
which has been responsible for what they
have perpetrated against us on Saturday
is made of the ex prisoners that were
released in the gilat Shalit deal so uh
I think that turns out that that deal
was bad when it was made in the first
place uh just the exchange of more than
thousand prisoners for one soldier but I
think that the long range outcome of
this deal is really devastating from the
point of view of Israel and we have to
be very careful in this kind of format
in this kind of pattering of deal but
that doesn't mean that there are not
ways that exist to release the the
Israeli who are held by them but again
as I said I think it should be dealt
with very delicately and not publicly Mr
ahed there's been plenty of talk about
systemic failures in Israeli
intelligence that led up to this attack
but you blame the government for this
you called it the outcome of the
arrogance of the present government
arrogance about
what well I'll tell you two things if I
may number
one I think it will be a mistake I don't
mind that they will make it by the way
but it will be a mistake to assume that
Israeli intelligence fails completed not
at all we saw
everything we have watched all their
preparations and it was one onone with
everything that we have uh scanned and
noticed and and looked at for a long
period of time the problem was that they
we misled ourselves that they will not
do it we because of what you quoted the
kind of arrogance who are they the Hamas
these uh terrorist organizations they
are not an army they are not capable of
doing things they will not do it you
know we are strong we are threatening we
are powerful we can stop everyone and so
on and so forth and actually uh uh a few
days before the holiday which Saturday
is a Jewish holiday and this was also
the Suka holiday which over left the
same day we pulled out a group of uh um
a few platoons of soldiers from Gaza
from that border from this position into
the West Bank to protect the settlers in
the West Bank uh at that time so uh this
was a reflection of the kind of
indifference and complacency and and
arrogance which I think has has
characterized the attitude of the
Israeli leadership and that's why I put
the blame on the Israeli leadership
their focus was the West Bank the focus
was how to protect the settlers the
Messianic Jews that were trying to upset
the balance in the West Bank instead of
protecting the Israeli citizens which
live in the state of Israel in a
territory which is not disputed which
can't be claimed by the Palestinians
because we have a vacu
entirely out of Gaza into a territory
which is recognized by the International
Community to be part of the state of
Israel and the fact also is that for a
period of time for years netan
explicitly preferred to deal with Hamas
in order not to have to deal with the uh
Palestinian
Authority why because he didn't want to
negotiate neate peace with the
Palestinian Authority and therefore he
uh put all the efforts in order to
create a certain rapport with the
Hamas we know that the Hamas was
financed with the assistance of Israel
for years by hundreds of millions of
dollars that came from Qatar with the
assistance of the state of Israel with
the full knowledge and support of the
Israeli government led by
netan when he took over in 2009 said
that his primary responsibility and
priority is to destroy Kamas and
throughout the period that he was prime
minister he made every possible effort
in order to buildas rather than to
destroy it and in a certain way the the
the expansion of the uh Kamas and the
strengthening of Hamas is largely also a
result of this policy of Nan Mr ahed
Israel can move into Gaza with the aim
of rooting out Hamas killing as many of
its Fighters as it can but what then
this won't be this wouldn't be a costree
operation for Israel far from it would
it it's very hard to answer this
question number one because if this is
what Israel is going to do I don't think
that we should spell it out publicly and
make announcement that we are going to
do this we have to keep a certain degree
of surprise if we came which I don't
know I have to say I'm not now in the
government I'm not in any official
position I'm outside I can only judge it
on the basis of my experience and my
knowledge being in the center stage for
so many years and taking these decisions
when I was in
charge I think number one it is
definitely itely true that Hamas is the
enemy and Hamas has to be dealt
with how to do it by trying to uh uh
penetrate
into with the ground forces of Israel
directly frontally as we have done in
the past I don't know I don't want to
join in this rhetoric what I say is this
this is a
long story it's going to take time it
requires a very careful planning and a
very calculated action we have to do it
in a manner that will bring forth a
practical results that will be useful
for the security of the South part of
the state of Israel and yet at the same
time will not antagonize the
International Community which presently
is very much sympathetic and in favor of
the state of Israel I'm afraid that if
these attacks which Tak taken place over
the last few days will continue and more
and more buildings in Gaza will be
destroyed and the smoke and the fire
will spread all over the screen and this
will be broadcasted day in and day out
all over the world soon enough the uh
the emotion and the sympathy which
has now spread all over the world in
favor of the state of Israel will change
and Israel needs this framework of
support in order to be able to achieve
the Strategic interests that we want to
achieve the UN the International
Community has already expressed concern
about the total Siege um electricity
water food being blocked from going in
which would you have done
that I don't want to say what I would
have done I said before I can say what I
wouldn't have done but I'll tell you
this the uh humanitarian
pressure might be a reasonable vehicle
in order to create a separation between
the civilian population which is not
involved in the terrorist
organizations one of the problems of of
that we encounter in this context is the
relative flexibility and freedom
thats in Gaza because the uh civilian
population which may not necessarily be
involved in Terrorist actions give them
support
So how do you separate between the two
this is a question is this the way to do
it
I'm not enough into the center of
decision making in order to answer this
question but I don't rule it out let's
talk if we may about the politics going
on at this moment what the government
might do next is it right to form what
they call a national Unity government or
attempt to form
one I I'm not enthusiastic about it to
put it prly
I I don't think that any person that has
a minimal respect for himself and for
his values would want to see with b and
with SM rich and what they representing
as long as they are Central members of
the government one is the Minister of
Finance and in charge of the territories
the other is the Minister of National
Security and as long as they are members
of the cabinet that stay out should
Netanyahu
resign yes do you think he
will he will be forced
to it will take some time it will take
some time you know the these kinds of
reactions have to build up a certain
momentum before they erupt in a force
that is UN I remember you're too young
so you can't I remember the Y keeper War
uh years
ago uh the war started with a terrible
shock it's true that subsequently Israel
won the war and as a result of the of
the achievement mil achievements of
Israel at the end of the day we also
created the circumstances that allowed
eventually Israel and Egypt to make
peace but uh that didn't save the
government of
Baya uh three weeks or four weeks after
the elections after the war started
there was an election in Israel and and
in the election the party of gold Mayo
won
decisively but four months later they
were forced to resign because the
buildup of opposition in the public was
too powerful for them to resist and they
had to resign and I think that similar
thing will happen sooner now than it was
then netan is history he's done he will
continue to be prime minister for a
short while but he is gone and for good
reasons Mr Omar whatever whatever I so I
thought so
before the war for other reasons but I
think that what we have witnessed in the
last few days is just the ultimate proof
for the accusations and the allegations
we made against the efficiency the focus
of the government the values of this
government and the ability of this
government to uh abide by his
commitments whatever Hamas has done this
time it's it's very different in scale
from anything it's attempted before in
in your view why did they launch this
particular Invasion and and why now
there's a strong suggestion around that
they wanted to torpedo a peace deal
between Israel and Saudi Arabia that
would have left the Palestinians that
they thought further isolated in the
cold do you buy that as a reason for
what we've seen what we've
witnessed oh it's a legitimate
interpretation I don't know if this is
true I I don't have the intelligence
that can tell me whether this something
that they have deliberated what I can
say are two things if they wanted to
torpedo the uh the agreement between
America Saudi Arabia and Israel then
definitely they for the time being they
have a measure of success I don't know
if this agreement will come but I don't
think that the reason for doing it if
they if that's what they wanted to do
was because they thought that the
Palestinians will be left over by
disagreement maybe they to the country
they were afraid that as a result of
this agreement there can be a basis that
will force the Israeli government to the
negotiate with the PLO and they don't
want negotiations you have to understand
something the worst enemy of Hamas is a
potential peace between Israel and the
Palestinians so if the agreement with
Saudi Arabia America and Israel may have
somehow uplifted the chances for some
contacts between the Israeli government
and the P the Palestinian Authority
between netan and Abu maim that may have
led into meaningful negotiations this
was the
threat that they wanted to uh to break
because they don't care for the
Palestinians to be left over on the
contrary they want the Palestinians to
be left over because this is what gives
them the kind of appeal to the
Palestinian
population you've always supported a
two-state Vision um but you couldn't
make it work when you were prime
minister although you said this week I
would have made peace with Abu Maan a
long time ago yeah is is the is the
two-state concept finished now as far as
you're concerned no no look there's no
other solution there is all only
a or a one-state solution a one-state
solution means that if Israel will be a
bational state with millions of
Palestinians living within the state of
Israel and almost inevitably even if
bang and swri will oppose it and
affections in the Israeli population
that support them will oppose it will
have to give all the Israelis that all
the Palestinians that will live within
the state of Israel uh full rights Poli
Rights Voting Rights and what not and
that will create a terrible
confrontation of a much worse kind than
what we have witnessed on Saturday
because then they will be within the
state of Israel part of the state of
Israel they will have also the benefit
of political vot votes and rights on the
one hand and the freedom to do whatever
they want to do in opposition to the
state of Israel because they don't want
to be part of the state of Israel they
want to have their own independent state
and uh to exercise their right of
self-determination so I think that the
the worst
dream that we may have is uh one uh
State solution and therefore the only
alternative which can bring a certain
degree of stability on the long run not
immediately of course not in a matter of
few years will take time it will be very
difficult for sides to go over the 55 or
60 years of
occupation but this is the only option
if I may say just one more thing in this
respect I hope and I spell it out in the
most in the most clear manner to all the
friends of Israel that when we are
through with the present crisis that the
same friends of the state of Israel that
support us
now and and give Israel the moral uh
freedom to take very severe actions
against the Hamas will come back to
Israel and say and now you have to do
what needs to be done in order to
provide the Palestinians in the West
Bank and the Palestinian Authority with
the freedom to exercise their right for
self-determination which means for a
two-state solution very brief because
we're running out of time how scared are
you right now for your
country I'm not scared for the country
Israel is a very strong we have an
unbelievably powerful civil uh Society
unbelievably powerful civil society and
I absolutely trust in the strengths
determination the enthusiasm and the
devotion which is manifested on these
days by all sections of population all
right I'm scared of the Israeli
government I'm scared of this group of
fogs violent Messianic fogs run by a
reckless
irresponsible person
netan which is leading the state of
Israel we have to get rid of them and we
have to get rid of Hamas first of
Hamas and then we will have to make all
the within the state of Israel all right
thank you very much for being on
conflict Z thank you thank
[Music]
[Applause]
you
[Music]